In this series of videos we'll
study the master method.
Which is a general mathematical tool for
analyzing the running time of divide and
conquer algorithms.
We'll begin in this video
motivating the method.
Then we'll give its formal description.
That'll be followed by a video
working through six examples.
Finally we'll conclude with three videos
that discuss proof of the master method.
With a particular emphasis on the
conceptual interpretation of the master
method's three cases.
So let me say at the outset that this
lecture's a little bit more mathematical
than the previous two.
But it's certainly not just math for
math's sake.
We'll be rewarded for our work with
this powerful tool, the master method,
which has a lot of predictive power.
It'll give us good advice about
which divide and conquer algorithms
are likely to run quickly and
which ones are likely to run less quickly.
Indeed it's sort of a general truism
that novel algorithmic ideas often
require mathematical analysis
to properly evaluate.
This lecture will be one
example of that truism.
As a motivating example consider the
computational problem of multiplying two n
digit numbers.
Recall from our first set of lectures
that we all learned the iterative
grade school multiplication algorithm.
And that that requires a number of basic
operations, additions and multiplications,
between single digits.
Which grows quadratically
with the number of digits, n.
On the other hand we also discussed
an interesting recursive approach
using the divide and conquer paradigm.
So recall, divide and conquer necessitates
identifying smaller sub-problems.
So for integer multiplication,
we need to identify smaller
numbers that we want to multiply.
So we proceed in the obvious way,
breaking each of the two numbers into
its left half of the digits, and
its right half of the digits.
For convenience, I'm assuming that
the number of digits n is even, but
it really doesn't matter.
Having decomposed x and y in this way,
we can now expand the product and
see what we get.
So let's put a box around this
expression and call it *.
So we begin with the sort of obvious
recursive algorithm where we just
evaluate the expression *
in the straightforward way.
That is, * contains four products
involving n over two digit numbers,
ac, ad, bc, and bd.
So we make four recursive
calls to compute them.
And then we complete
the evaluation in the natural way.
Namely, we append 0s as necessary, and
add up these three terms
to get the final result.
The way we reason about the running time
of recursive algorithms like this one
is using what's called a recurrence.
So to introduce a recurrence,
let me first make some notation T(n).
This is going to be the quantity
that we really care about.
The quantity that we want to upper bound.
Namely this will be the worst
case number of operations
that this recursive algorithm requires
to multiply two n-digit numbers.
This is exactly what we
want to upper bound.
A recurrence, then,
is simply a way to express T(n)
in terms of T of smaller numbers.
That is the running time of an algorithm
in terms of the work done by its recursive
calls.
So every recurrence has two ingredients.
First of all it has a base case describing
the running time when there's no further
recursion.
And in this integer multiplication
algorithm, like in most divide and
conquer algorithms, the base case is easy.
Once you get down to a small input,
in this case two one digit numbers,
then the running time is just constant.
All you do is multiply the two digits and
return the result.
So I'm going to express that
by just declaring the T(1),
the time needed to multiply one digit
numbers, as bounded above by a constant.
I'm not going to bother to
specify what this constant is.
You can think of it as one or
two if you like.
It's not going to matter for
what's to follow.
The second ingredient in
a recurrence is the important one.
And it's what happens in the general case
when you're not in the base case, and
you make recursive calls.
And all you do is write down the running
time in terms of two pieces.
First of all the work done
by the recursive calls, and
second of all the work
that's done right here now.
Work done outside of the recursive calls.
So on the left hand side of this
general case, we just write T(n).
And then we want an upper bound on T(n) in
terms of the work done by recursive calls
and the work done outside
of recursive calls.
And I hope it's self evident what
the recurrence should be in this
recursive algorithm for
integer multiplication.
As we discussed,
there are exactly four recursive calls.
And each is invoked on
a pair of n/2 digit numbers.
So that gives us 4 times the time
needed to multiply n/2 digit numbers.
So what do we do outside
of the recursive call?
Well, we pad the results of the recursive
calls with a bunch of zeros and
we add them up.
And I'll leave it to you to verify
that grade school addition, in fact,
runs in time linear in
the number of digits.
So putting it all together the amount of
work we do outside of the recursive calls
is linear.
That is, it's O(n).
Let's move on to the second,
more clever, recursive algorithm for
integer multiplication,
which dates back to Gauss.
Gauss's insight was to realize in
the expression * that we're trying to
evaluate, there's really only three
fundamental quantities that we care about.
The coefficients for
each of the three terms in the expression.
So this, leads us to hope that perhaps
we can compute these three quantities
using only three recursive calls,
rather than four.
And indeed, we can.
So what we do is we recursively
compute a times c, like before, and
b times d, like before.
But then we compute the product
of a + b with c + d.
And the very cute fact is if we number
these three products, one, two, and three.
That the final quantity
that we care about,
the coefficient of the 10 to the n/2 term,
namely ad + bc.
Is nothing more than the third
product minus each of the first two.
So that's the new algorithm,
what's the new recurrence?
The base case obviously is
exactly the same as before.
So the question then is,
how does the general case change?
And I'll let you answer
this in the following quiz.
So the correct response for
this quiz is the second one.
Namely the only thing that
changes with respect to the first
recurrence is that the number of recursive
calls drops from four down to three.
A couple of quick comments.
So first of all,
I'm being a little bit sloppy when
I say there's three recursive calls,
each on numbers with n/2 digits.
When you take the sums a + b and c + d,
those might well have n/2 plus 1 digits.
Amongst friends, let's ignore that.
Let's just call it n/2 digits
in each of the recursive calls.
As usual, the extra plus one is not
going to matter in the final analysis.
Secondly I'm ignoring exactly what the
constant factor is in the linear work done
outside of the recursive calls.
Indeed it's a little bit bigger in
Gauss's algorithm than it is in the naive
algorithm with four recursive calls.
But it's only by a constant factor.
And that's going to be suppressed
in the big O notation.
Let's look at this recurrence and compare
it to two other reccurrences, one bigger,
one smaller.
So first of all, as we noted, it differs
from the previous recurrence of the naive
recursive algorithm in having
one fewer recursive call.
So, we have no idea what the running
time is on either of these
two recursive algorithms.
But we should confident that this
one certainly can only be better.
That's for sure.
Another point of contrast is merge sort.
So think about what the recurrence would
look like for the merge sort algorithm.
It would be almost identical to this one
except instead of a three we'd have a two.
Right?
Merge sort makes two recursive calls,
each on an array of half the size.
And outside of the recursive calls
it does linear work, namely for
the merge sub-routine.
We know the running time of merge sort.
It's n log n.
So this algorithm, Gauss's algorithm,
is going to be worse, but
we don't know by how much.
So while we have a couple clues about what
the running time of this algorithm might
be more or less than.
Honestly we have no idea what the running
time of Gauss's recursive algorithm for
integer multiplication really is.
It is not obvious.
We currently have no intuition for it.
We don't know what the solution
to this recurrence is.
But it will be one super-special
case of the general master method,
which we'll tackle next.